The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By
ht
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.


"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.
"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.
"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

