The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By
ht
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By
ht
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Holding the line"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "Holding the line"

Author: Harold Baldwin

Release date: May 14, 2024 [eBook #73624]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1918

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "HOLDING THE LINE" ***







[Frontispiece: Harold Baldwin]




  "Holding the Line"

  By

  SERGEANT HAROLD BALDWIN

  Of the First Division, Canadian
  Expeditionary Forces



  _With Illustrations and Diagrams_



  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1918




  Copyright
  A. C. McClurg & Co.
  1918

  Published, February, 1918

  _Copyrighted in Great Britain_



  W. F. HALL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




Dedication

With deep affection and reverence, I humbly dedicate these
reminiscences to the memory of the best pals that ever lived, and who
shared with me the joys and sorrows of those never-to-be-forgotten
days in France and Flanders when we held the line, and who have paid
the supreme price--

  _Major Campbell
  Captain Scanlon
  Major Hopkins
  Private Skerry
  Private Shields
  Private Hood
  Private Small
  Private (Runner) Jocelyn
  Private Ruth
  Private Wellbelove
  Captain Meikle
  Captain Curry
  Major Tanaille
  Captain McGee
  Lieutenant Mundell_




Prefatory Remark

When war's alarm sounded in Canada, like many thousands of young men,
the spirit of adventure was strong within me and here was an
opportunity, as I thought, to kill two birds with the same
stone--gratify my love of adventure and serve the Empire at one and
the same time.

I have endeavored to give an exact picture of my surroundings, with
its accompanying feelings and sensations, from the time I stepped
into the ranks until I got my final Blighty, and if my word picture
will have the effect of making any man get into khaki, I will be more
than repaid, because the cause of the world's liberty demands the
active cooperation of every able-bodied man who can get into the game.

There may be a protest in the minds of some against the swearing
habit of the soldier.  I firmly believe that if he were deprived of
the power to express himself profanely when occasion seemed to
warrant, his efficiency would be materially hampered.  And,
therefore, I have no apology to make.  Even the chaplains have been
known to swear quite violently at times.

Since beginning the work of putting my data into book form, the
United States has accepted the gauntlet of battle thrown down to her
by German militarism, and the prospect of American lads and British
Tommies fighting shoulder to shoulder in the cause of democracy and
the world's freedom has inspired me with a new hope and faith in the
outcome, and I am resting content in the unshakable belief that when
the might of the Greatest Republic gets into action, the murderous
tiger of German autocracy, with its fangs dripping blood from the
lives of countless innocent victims, will in short order receive its
final death thrust.

_Chicago, January, 1918_  H.B.




Introductory

While adventure of every kind and character abounds on all sides in
the trenches, in billets and in the rear of the front line, yet the
grim seriousness of the business soon possesses a man with but a
single idea in life, especially when in the vicinity of No Man's
Land--to get the Hun and get him as quickly as he can.

In these pages I have but lightly touched on the awfulness in the
sections of country over-run by the human devils.  I have two reasons
for so doing: First, because I do not believe it lies in the power of
human ken to adequately describe the inferno created by the Hun, and,
secondly, if I were to devote my lines solely to that phase of my
life while in active service, every page should be deeply edged in
black, because--"I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word would
harrow up thy soul."

Such is not my purpose.  I am blest by nature with the most intense
optimism and this spirit has never deserted me but once; and I think
under the same strain it would have taken leave of any man; and since
I returned from the front I am more than ever determined that for the
balance of my time on earth I shall endeavor to radiate optimism
whenever and wherever I can.  I think I will live the longer for so
doing, and maybe those who come within the zone of my voice and my
pen may also be the better for the dissemination of my love in the
joy of living.

Therefore, the purpose I have undertaken has been to faithfully
relate my experiences, and those of my chums, from the point of view
of one who looks at the brighter side of life while undergoing the
most severe test of grit and endurance that ever tried mortal men.




  Contents


  CHAPTER

  I  Answering the Call
  II  En Route to Valcartier
  III  Canada's War Camp
  IV  Soldiers in the Making
  V  Crossing the Atlantic
  VI  Land Ahoy
  VII  Salisbury Plain
  VIII  Life in the English Camp
  IX  Getting Ready to Go
  X  Leaving for France
  XI  Landing in France
  XII  My Baptism of Fire
  XIII  In the Front Line
  XIV  Saxons and Prussians
  XV  Training for Runner
  XVI  By the Wayside
  XVII  Steenvoorde
  XVIII  Ypres
  XIX  Battle of Ypres
  XX  Hell Let Loose
  XXI  Hanging On
  XXII  Here They Come
  XXIII  Fighting for Our Lives
  XXIV  The Boches Balked
  XXV  Fun and Fury
  XXVI  Yser
  XXVII  The Fun of It
  XXVIII  Leaving Yser
  XXIX  More Hell
  XXX  The Last Fight
  XXXI  The Aftermath
  XXXII  In Heaven
  XXXIII  Back to Earth
  XXXIV  Home
  Epilogue




Illustrations


Harold Baldwin ... Frontispiece

The Bull-Dog Behind the Flag

The Remains of a Once Prosperous Village

Instruments of War and Peace Working Side by Side

Our Nest (Dugout) Is on the Right

Meals Are Any Time When One Is Hungry

What a First-Line Trench Looks Like

German Shell Exploding Near British Battery

A Monster British Gun

Moving a Gun into Position

A Winterly Morning

Writing to the Old Folks at Home

What Is Left of Ypres Cathedral

There Are Leisure Hours Even in the Front Trench

Cleaning-Up Time

Diagram No. 1

Diagram No. 2

The Yser Canal

Two Tommies Talking It Over

Ready for a Raid on the Enemy's Trenches

The Raiding Party Going to "Give 'Em Hell"

The "War Twins"

Feeling Good in Blighty




Holding the Line



CHAPTER I

ANSWERING THE CALL

One sunny day in the early part of August, 1914, a little man with a
bronzed face and a dingy set of overalls walked into the armories in
Saskatoon, the wonder city of Saskatchewan.  He was the author of
this tale.

"Hello, Shorty, what brings you here?  Hey, fellows, here's our
mascot."  This was the
 greeting I got from one of the recruiting sergeants.

I had come straight from the harvest field, a journey of eighty miles
on horseback and train, without a coat, with well ventilated
overalls, equally well-worn shoes and an unshaven chin, and my
spirits sank perceptibly as I realized the contrast between my shabby
five-feet-four and the classy-looking recruits gathered in the
armories.

However, like the rest of the Englishmen in Canada who had answered
the call I was determined, if it was humanly possible, to go overseas
with the first contingent of twenty thousand men, and I duly
presented myself for enlistment.  My attestation was taken and I was
sent to the doctor, being duly warned that I would have to pass the
final test at Valcartier, Canada's first great war camp.

When I entered the examining room my spirits took another drop as I
saw the magnificent bunch of tall, stalwart fellows who were awaiting
their turn.  I felt like a pigmy and almost turned tail then and
there.  "Now or never," I thought, as I stepped up to the doctor.

"What do you want, Bub?"

"To enlist, sir."

"Forget it," he said, "you are too short."

I lacked just two inches of the required height.  He gave me the
once-over and was a little taken aback when he found my weight was
one hundred and forty pounds.

I also thought I would clinch my case by telling him, without winking
an eye, that I had served with the First Battalion of the North
Staffordshire Regiment in England for four years, which was a
battalion of the regular army, and that as they had thought
sufficiently well of my stature to sign me up, a Canadian volunteer
battalion could not in reason be any more particular than one of the
Imperial Army.  The falsehood is on record there today in my
attestation papers and I'm not in the least ashamed of it.

"Well," said he, "you are as fit as any man, but they are sticklers
about the height.  I'll tell you what I'll do, you may leave with the
boys for Valcartier and that will bring you two thousand miles nearer
England.  As you are determined to go anyway, part of your trip will
be at the government's expense."

I felt as if I had grown two inches when he said this.  I got into
the ranks at once and commenced drilling with the rest of the boys
until we left for Valcartier.

It was a nasty wet night when we left Saskatoon, but a record crowd
turned out to see that wild band start for the Great Adventure.  Few
of us had relatives there; the majority of us were Britishers who had
left the Old Country to try our luck in the new land; but many were
veterans of other wars who wanted to get into the game again, some
had encircled the world in their wanderings, homesteaders, railway
men, clerks--every walk of life was represented.

Ardent patriotism for the Old Flag and all that it stood for was the
prompting motive of the rush to get into the First Canadian Division,
but there was also the spirit of adventure strong within every man.

The mayor and city council and other government officials were
present to bid us the soldier's farewell, "Good-bye, Good Luck, and
Godspeed," and the train pulled out amid such a roar of cheering that
the "Girl I Left Behind Me" was fairly drowned in the waves of
departing cheers.




CHAPTER II

EN ROUTE TO VALCARTIER

From the time we left Saskatoon until we got into the great camp, I
dare say there wasn't a man of us who gave a second's thought to the
idea that within six months' time we would have had such a share in
the defense of the world's liberties as would make the name of Canada
a household word wherever the English language is spoken, and cause a
thrill of justifiable pride to run through the blood of every
Canadian, aye, and every Britisher, because every Britisher takes
almost as much pride in the feats performed by men from another part
of the Empire as he does in the deeds of the men from his own
particular corner.

We were not long on the train before we began to get acquainted with
each other and friendships were quickly formed that were soon to be
tested and tried in the fiercest flame that ever burned, and with no
exception did they fail to ring true.

And right here and now I want to say, from a full heart, that the
greatest privilege ever accorded an ordinary mortal like myself was
that of serving with that devil-may-care crowd of lads who sang and
chaffed and swore their way from exile in western Canada to their
graves in France and Flanders.

The trip to Valcartier was uneventful except for the loss of a
breakfast one morning that was sorely needed.  Five or six of the
recruit waiters had just entered our car from the supply-car,
carrying trays with our ham and eggs, and our mouths were watering as
we watched them coming, when a sudden lurch of the train sent the end
waiter bumping into the man next him, and he followed suit to the man
next him, and so on down the line, and in the effort to keep the
trays and themselves from falling, the contents of every blooming
tray was spilled on the floor, the seats, and the heads of the hungry
recruits.

Our comments would not pass censor.  Suffice it to say, if cursing
could put the Canadian Pacific Railway out of business that
organization would long since have been defunct.  We had to go hungry
until noon as there was no time to get another meal prepared.

Another incident happened on that trip that concerned me most.  We
had stopped for a short visit at an Ontario town and our officers
decided to give the people a sample of our military bearing, so we
were marched through the streets.  I think we managed to keep step
for fully five minutes at a time.  A kind-hearted old creature
clapped her eyes on the "child," as she expressed it, marching
alongside of his overgrown brothers, and she began to wail and point
me out to everyone around there as far as her voice could carry, and
to make matters worse we were halted with poor little me standing
right opposite her.

"That poor child should not be allowed to go until he has at least
stopped growing," was the burden of her plaint, and I was so incensed
I honestly felt I could kill her with my bare hands and revel in the
gore, because every fellow in the ranks was giving me the snicker,
and some of the unfeeling brutes were egging the old lady on.  I
tried to pay no attention--Lord, how I did want to inform her I was
twenty-four years old and had been separated from my mother for six
years.  It took me a long time to live down the chaffing I got, due
to the solicitous wails of that dear old female.

However, sober reflection tells me that she was not so much to blame,
because I surely must have been a sorry figure in my five-feet-four
and dressed as I was the day I left the harvest field, so I have
since credited the outburst to her motherly instinct.

After we had entrained again I was seated beside Morgan, a chum with
whom I had become very intimate, who was possessed of what might be
called a second sight, a gift of foreseeing things, and he then told
me of a number of things that would happen to me, every one of which
has turned out exactly as he foretold it.  For instance, he said the
doctor would pass me at Valcartier; and later in Flanders, he told me
when I was going to be wounded.  He also predicted his own wound.
Morgan's devotion to me all through our campaigning was positively
remarkable, and, as this story will show, I have never had cause to
regret the chance that brought us together.

We finally arrived in Valcartier, detrained in the broiling sun, and
trudged from the depot to our new canvas homes at the foot of the
Laurentian Hills, which formed a wonderful background, with the
Jaques Cartier River on our front, soon to become the swimming bath
of twenty to forty thousand men.




CHAPTER III

CANADA'S WAR CAMP

When we reached Valcartier no one in his wildest dreams would ever
have associated us with soldiers, as a more motley-looking crowd
would be hard to find.  Here trudges a squat Scotchman, his freckled
face a stream of perspiration, cursing the heat with a Doric accent
you could cut with a shovel; next to him marches Big Bill Skerry, a
tall Nova Scotian, as straight as the pine trees of his native
province.  Dear old Bill! he lies in the death trap at Ypres, dying
as he had lived, afraid of nothing in human form, witty and dry of
speech, quickest in repartee, and proud of his Irish-Canadian
ancestry.  And for all his profane mouth and caustic tongue, he was
one of the best and bravest comrades a man could find with whom to
share the trials and pleasures of active service.  Marching with his
usual air of detached boredom is Captain Innis Hopkins, the most
ridiculed and, later, the best loved officer of all the gallant men
who cursed us and nursed us and finally led us into France, as fine a
bunch of men as ever stepped from a deck of a transport.

At my immediate right proudly marched a handsome, rosy-cheeked boy,
with a complexion a lady might have envied; tall, lithe, with the
promise of a fine manhood, and with the frank blue eyes of him
shining with good-natured deviltry, he was already winning the hearts
of his future comrades.  By his side tramped a squat, slightly
bow-legged man, of swarthy skin and jet-black hair, streaked with
gray, surmounted by a stubble of black beard.  The contrast between
those two was startling, and yet a friendship sprang up between them
that no ordinary civilian ever will understand, a friendship cemented
by sharing danger and suffering, sinking every selfish consideration
for the well-being of the other.

This will give some slight idea of the boys I soldiered with and who
were to be my chums.  But of all these, Morgan was closest to me.  By
that mysterious attraction which draws men to one another we became
chums and yet no two men could be more unlike in temperament; he was
reserved almost to the point of rudeness, while I have always been
ready--perhaps too much so for my own good--to make friends at once.
When we got into the game, through the medium of that peculiar
characteristic I have already mentioned, he sensed, like the steer
nearing the shambles, any disaster or trouble ahead, and at those
times he would overwhelm me with demonstrations of affection, and
afterwards, apparently ashamed of his outburst, he would find some
pretext to pick a quarrel with me, and curse me with a fluency and
picturesqueness only acquired by long and careful practice.  Many
times we got to blows.  But we loved each other and still do, and his
love for me was thoroughly evidenced later on.




CHAPTER IV

SOLDIERS IN THE MAKING

The first thing we did after our arrival was to go to the doctor for
final examination.  Again my heart dropped when I saw what seemed to
be a physically splendid man rejected, and I felt that my case was
hopeless.  I stripped, and, with my heart pounding like a
trip-hammer, presented myself.  I was reassured almost instantly by
his kindly manner.  He gave me a most rigid looking over and
pronounced me fit, but shook his head dubiously at my height.  An
inspiration seized me: "Doctor, I may be small, but it is
concentrated stuff."

He laughed and told me to dress.  Trembling with delight and relief I
fell into line to take my first "shot in the arm," as we called our
inoculation against typhoid, and when the surgeon jabbed me with the
needle I promptly fainted for the first time in my life.

Life now began in earnest; day succeeded day of hard training.  The
weather was ideal, our only trouble being the dust-clouds raised from
the sandy ground by marching troops.

Uniforms were issued, and in two weeks' time one would not have
recognized us.  Many laughable incidents occurred in connection with
our uniforms; nearly every man got something that was too big or too
small.  The quartermaster gave me a hat that was two or three sizes
too large.  I asked him what I should do and he told me to come back
in the morning, which I did.

"You told me to come back and see you, sir, about my cap; it is too
big."

"Well, I can tell by your bothering nerve that you've got the swelled
head and it won't be long before it fits you.  Get to blazes out of
here."

I did not think it prudent to pursue the matter further.  I was
wondering what I would do with the cap when I espied a fellow with a
head like a bull and a cap resting just on the crown.  "Here's my
chance," thought I, and I was after him in a jiffy.  He was a Scot.

"Matey, how would you like to swop caps?"

"Wha's the matter wi' yours?"

"Mine's too large."  He took mine and examined it critically, feeling
the quality and the texture.

"It's no as gude as mine; I wudna swop."

"Why, yours doesn't fit you and mine would."

"Ay, but the quality, lad, look at the quality o' mine."

"It's just exactly the same as mine."

"Naething o' the kind," he said, "the quartermaster is a particular
friend o' mine and he gie me one especially."

"He did, like ducks."

"O vera weel.  Besides, I dinna mind a little thing like that; it's
the quality.  But I'll tell you what I'll do," he said, "if you want
the cap an' will gie me an extra shillin' on account o' the quality,
I'll maybe let ye hae it."

I spent no further time arguing with him; I realized at once he was
the original one hundred per cent efficiency man who bought something
from a Jew and sold it to another Jew at a profit.  I gave him the
quarter.  He took it, but before giving me his cap, he took mine,
tried it on carefully (they were identical in every particular except
the size), then handed me his, gave me a wink and walked off.  I felt
I had really gotten my twenty-five cents' worth.

The happiest people in Valcartier that time were the tailors; they
reaped a harvest from our repairs and alterations.  An old political
campaigner in the battalion suggested that the tailors should get
busy with the administration and arrange to throw their support to
the government if the chief of staff would agree to retain the
services of the quartermasters who were such marvelously strange
guessers at the size of the average man.  We laughed ourselves to
sleep that night.

The growth of Valcartier during our stay was like a chapter in
Aladdin.  Like mushrooms in the night there sprang up stores, houses
and amusement places of every description, and they did a thriving
business, because the men rapidly acquired the spending habits of the
soldier.

An attempt by one of the moving-picture proprietors to extort money
from the soldiers turned out rather badly for him.  He advertised the
same picture for a number of nights under a different title each
night, and a hard-headed Scotch soldier, upon inquiring if it were
not the same film they had seen the previous night, was told to go to
hell.

"I'm running this show," said the proprietor.

"Weel, ye'll no be runnin' it long, I'm thinkin'," said Jock.  "Hey,
lad," he yelled to me as I happened along, "run like the deil to
Company B, Third Battalion, over yonder, and tell them Red Stuart
wants to clean up a crook over here.  Hurry, noo."

I shot across in the direction indicated and found a bunch of
Highlanders sprawled on the ground, smoking their pipes.  I delivered
the message and in a twinkling fully fifty brawny sons of the heather
sprang from the ground and were dashing toward Red Stuart.  I ran
after them and awaited developments a short distance off.  Red
quickly told them what had happened and their Scotch sense of justice
wronged was thoroughly aroused.

"Wha'll ye be wantin' us tae do, Red?"

"MacDonald, take thirty men to the rear and up-end the damned show;
I'll take care o' the front."

MacDonald and his thirty men circled to the back of the house and
inside of a minute it commenced to quiver and slant forward.  The
soldier-patrons came tumbling out in a hurry, some of them head
foremost, and soon were admiring spectators when they learned the
cause of the trouble.  The other Scotties, under Red Stuart, were
lined up in front to catch the theater when it came down.  Just then
the proprietor came tumbling out.

"Who in hell's doing this?" he demanded of Red.  Red's answer was a
blow on the jaw that put him to sleep.  Then the money from the till
came rolling out over the floor and Red yelled.

"Quick, Sandy and Alec, pick it up an' we'll divide it after."

Sandy and Alec let go of the building and gathered up the money in
their caps, and Red shouted.

"All together, lads, let her go."

The men at the back gave a heave, the men in front let go, and down
crashed the frail building, splitting in two.  A streak of flame shot
up from the middle and soon a bright blaze lit up the scene, and by
its light the Sons of St. Andrew religiously divided the spoils of
war.

But the trouble did not end here.  A fire-call was turned in by the
nearest bugler, was caught up by each successive bugler in turn, and
in two minutes the entire camp was in a turmoil.  The men fell into
line, yelling like wild Indians; it was pandemonium let loose.  The
roar of noise traveled clear down to the end of the lines, where it
reached the artillery, the horses stampeded, made a mad rush for the
river, and forty valuable animals were drowned.




CHAPTER V

THE ATLANTIC

Our military exercises had built every man of us up to such a degree
of physical perfection that we felt fit for any test of endurance,
and the absence of worry, the companionship of so many fine chums,
the good wholesome food and invigorating air had worked wonders in
us.  We were no longer the awkward squad that had slouched off the
train into Valcartier.

Our officers told us we were a disgrace to the service, but swiftly
the change was taking place.  We could walk our ten or fifteen miles
in regulation time, and the standard of our shooting was
exceptionally high.

At first only twenty thousand men were to go, but as seventy-five
thousand had responded to the call and the eagerness of the boys to
go had caused them to redouble their efforts to become efficient, the
first expeditionary force was increased to thirty-three thousand men.

Toward the end of September we were inspected for the last time by
his Royal Highness, the Duke of Connaught, and in the afternoon we
were ordered to get our kits packed and stuff ready, as we were
leaving for England.  Excitement ran high and every man was in his
place next morning at ten o'clock.  It was a rainy Sunday morning,
but that did not dampen our spirits.

"Battalions will move off by the right of companies, No. 1 leading,"
came the order; the senior officer commanding shouted, "Company,
tshun; form fours; right; left wheel; quick march."  We were off for
England.

After traveling the eighteen miles from camp to Quebec we boarded the
big steamer that was to bear us to England.  My battalion was
assigned to the _Lapland_, the largest of the fleet transports.  In
her hold thousands of sacks of flour were stacked, part of Canada's
gift to the motherland immediately on the outbreak of the war.  Some
of us did not appreciate the gift as we might, because it was part of
our duty to load it from the dock to the hold.

I had a pardonable thrill of pride as I stood on the dock and watched
our fellows file aboard and I could not help asking myself--"Could
these bronzed, cleanly-built, athletic men be the same who tramped
wearily into camp one short month ago?"  Such was the result of our
officers' untiring work and the patient efforts of the regular
sergeants who first took us in hand, and last, but not least, the
keenness of the men themselves to become efficient and disciplined
soldiers.

The whole fleet sailed from Quebec to Gaspe Bay, where we were picked
up by our convoy.  The arrival of the battleships and cruisers was
greeted with rousing cheers, which were answered in kind by the men
of the fighting ships.  It was the most impressive sight I have ever
witnessed; up to that time nothing had so majestically expressed the
sentiment of the Overseas Dominions hastening to the help of the
mother country.

By this time the seriousness of the conflict began to dawn upon the
country.  The magnificent exploits of French's glorious little force
had fired every one of us, and every time the band played
"Tipperary," the wildest enthusiasm prevailed.

It was on one of the first nights aboard that the first shadow of the
war fell upon me.  A sort of gloomy mist rose before my eyes and
clouded my brain, and I felt morally certain that something had
happened to Tom, my twin brother, and sorrowfully I have to tell that
he died in the battle of the Marne.  I did not learn the particulars
until I reached England.  He died as he would have wished to die,
fighting gloriously for the Empire.

Very few of the battalions had bands with them, but the Sixth of
Winnipeg, that embarked with us, had a splendid band, and they were
most generous in supplying us with musical treats all the way across.

I shall never forget the scene at these concerts, especially at
night--the moon shining on the sea, calm almost as a lake, the men
lounging in various attitudes of ease, some leaning over the
taffrail, others in chairs, and all smoking and enjoying the strains
to their hearts' content.

The only disagreeable feature of the voyage was the deadly regularity
with which we were fed upon stew; our feelings in this regard were
put into rhyme by one of the grim humorists of the battalion:

  Our daily bread is stew,
  That's all the cook can brew,
  For kind heaven's sake, please give us some cake
  Or anything else that's new.


One night at dinner, when the waiter handed him his stew, he stood
up, and, calling for silence, announced that he had a few remarks to
offer for the benefit of the misguided souls who entertained the
notion that we were not properly fed.  There was an angry clatter of
knives on the plates of the stew, as the men were fighting mad with
the monotony of the grub, but finally the speaker got a semblance of
order and he commenced:

"Soldiers of the King, I believe it is duly right and fair to the
cook and the commissariat that the idea which has seemed to be
finding lodgment in the minds of some of us that we are not properly
looked after, as far as our stomachs are concerned, should be
banished at once, and I feel sure it will be when I point out to you
in a few words how erroneous that thought is.

"Have you ever considered what a load of anxiety is lifted from our
minds as to what we are going to have for breakfast, for dinner, for
supper?  Have you ever thought about that?"

"You're damned right, we have," from fifty throats at once.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: The Bull-dog behind the flag has licked all comers in
Western Canada.  The men are Canadian veterans, who, with bull-dog
persistency, "held the line" in Flanders Author on extreme right.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------

"Be patient, please, for just a moment.  Have you ever thought that
we are saved absolutely every petty worry as to whether the roast
beef will be tough, the chops old and unpalatable, the fish mushy, or
the pudding not properly seasoned?  Not a particle of troublesome
speculation about any of these things."

"For God's sake, let them trouble us all they want," from the
audience.  He continued:

"We take our places at the table calm and serene in the perfect
confidence that there is not the least doubt as to what we are going
to eat, and filled full of adoration in the sacredness of our food,
for do we not know that it is like unto the holiest man that ever
trod this old earth of ours--the same, yesterday, today and forever."

A roar of approval greeted the speech and the somewhat blasphemous
reference, but from that time on we took the humorous view of the
situation, thereby saving ourselves a lot of misery.

One night at dinner, when our usual stew-portions were served, one of
the fellows left the table for a few minutes, and while he was gone
we switched his soup, substituting water, and hastily, but
thoroughly, scraped every scrap of meat off the bone.  He came back,
tasted of his soup, then poured it over the table.  He picked up his
soup bone, looked for the meat, and sent the bone flying down the
cabin.  Unluckily it struck an officer and he was promptly bundled
into the clink (guardhouse).  He was an Irishman, and on his trial
the following morning he made a thoroughly characteristic defense.

"Sor, to tell yez the thruth, I just happened to think av the
athrocities av them damned Germans on the helpless wimen and
childher, an' I thought how would I feel if those near an' dear to me
were threated in that way, an' on the impulse av the moment, without
thinkin', or lookin', I flung the bone, imaginin' I was right in the
middle av the fightin'."

It didn't save him, but it cut off some days from his stay in the
clink.

On more than one occasion our thirst for revenge on the stew was
gratified by seeing it heaved all over the floor by a sudden roll of
the boat in rough weather.

Our chief form of entertainment while aboard ship, in addition to the
band concerts, was the vaudeville shows that were given.  Among our
cosmopolitan crowd much fine talent was discovered--songs, readings,
exhibitions of juggling, boxing competitions, etc.--served to while
away the monotony of the voyage and make life livable during the
crossing.

Church services were held regularly every Sunday; the two
denominations represented were Church of England (Episcopal) and
Roman Catholic.  Mass was held at eight-thirty and the Protestant
minister commenced his service at ten-thirty, at which were assembled
all the balance of the battalion.  Although my attendance was
compulsory, these services were deeply impressive and will remain in
my memory as long as I live.  The majestic ship ploughing through the
water and the swish of the spray mingling with the men's voices as we
sang the hymns we learned in childhood made a lasting impression on
all of us, and I am sure that the emotion of those moments has stayed
with every man throughout our campaign in France and since.




CHAPTER VI

LAND AHOY

On a beautiful evening in the fall, after a voyage of twenty-two days
on the water, the transports quietly stole, one by one, into the
harbor of Plymouth.  None of the townspeople had the remotest idea
that the Colonials were anywhere near England, and it was not until
the _Strathcona Horse_ displayed a huge pennant from the ship, which
was anchored close to the quay, that our identity was disclosed.  It
took them but a couple of seconds to grasp the fact that the
Canadians had arrived in England, and in less than half an hour the
harbor was alive with every conceivable kind of craft, loaded near to
the sinking point with cheering humanity.

I wish I could describe my sensations as I once again looked upon the
green fields of my native land.  To find out how much one loves his
home he must leave it, and after my voluntary exile of six or seven
years, I wanted to shout and sing for very joy.

We English may be dense, thick-headed, slow to act, and guilty of
several other things charged to us, but I doubt if any nation could
love its country with more intensity than true Englishmen.

Steering close to our boat the crowd asked us if we needed anything.
We replied that we needed everything, and we got it; cigarettes,
tobacco, food, candy--in fact, everything that could comfort a
soldier's heart, was thrown on our decks.

I gazed at the shores of my native land, listening to the strains of
"O Canada," played by the band and echoed back by the glorious hills
of Devon, and the thrill within me was indescribable.  There was also
an undercurrent of wonderful feeling that made me proud, not only
that I was a Britisher, but that our grim old mother-nation was
nursing there in one of her great harbors the robust manhood of a
virile daughter-nation that had heard the call and answered and that
I was a part, however small, of that answer.

Songs of the British nations would go floating out to sea and inland
to the hills.  Following the strains of "Annie Laurie" would come
"Men of Harlech," "The British Grenadiers," "Dear Little Shamrock,"
and then the incomparable lilt of "Tipperary."

We finally received the order to disembark.  Now it is an unwritten
law in the army, in the practice of that most soldierly art of
thieving, that a man must thieve from every battalion and company
except his own, and we thought we might just as well start on
anything lying around loose on the _Lapland_.  The Colonel may have
wondered why we came to the "Present arms" with such alacrity when we
said farewell to that splendid ship that brought us over; but the
truth of it was we wanted to get away from the scene of our
activities before any uncomfortable questions could be asked.

After a thoroughly profane and good-natured farewell with the burly
British sailors and a rousing welcome from the people, we marched out
in force to be delivered into the hands of the citizens.  And such a
welcome!  It beggars description.  I never had my hand shaken so much
and I never was kissed so much in all my life.

One middle-aged lady, with two beautiful daughters, exclaimed, "You
brave boy, I am going to kiss you for your mother's sake."  "I will
too," said her daughters, and I was kissed by the entire family.  I
couldn't help venturing, "How about a kiss for my own sake?"  And I
glanced at the daughters.  "Surely," said the mother, and she kissed
me again, but the girls were a little bit abashed and did not respond
to my suggestion, much to my disappointment.

At one spot in our welcome I was again the subject of an outburst of
damnable sympathy from a motherly-hearted woman who almost went into
hysterics at the idea of such a child as I going out to help stem the
on-rushing Huns.  However, my comrades were filled full of the
attentions they were receiving from their male and female admirers
and my predicament passed unnoticed this time, for which I fervently
thanked God.

In the course of our parade we were taken in front of Drake's
monument and I could not help wondering what he would have thought,
had he been there in the flesh, at the sight of those hardy
adventurers.  Surely he would have felt that here indeed were men
after his own heart, ready and willing to dare everything, to go
anywhere for the sake of the motherland and their own new land across
the seas.

By sheer strength we reached the depot at last and entrained for
Salisbury Plain.




CHAPTER VII

SALISBURY PLAIN

Midnight, and as dark as pitch found us shivering and blinking
sleepily on the platform of a small railway station on the outskirts
of Salisbury Plain.  From here a truly murderous hike blistered our
feet, spoiled our tempers and proved to us in no uncertain manner how
stale we had become during our journey overseas.  Just as day dawned
we floundered wearily to a place where tents flapped sadly against
tent poles as if sympathizing with our woeful plight.  These tents
had simply been erected and loosely staked out and were left for us
to tighten and make habitable.  We were too weary to bother with
them; we simply dropped on the ground and slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion.

When we awoke we found ourselves drenched to the skin, our tents
still half erected, the commissariat all disorganized and the plain
hidden in solid sheets of driving rain.  This was just a prelude of
the terrible days to come.

In a day or two we had shaken down, with seven men to each tent, and
our training began.  A brief spell of fine weather followed, with a
visit from the late Lord Roberts to inspect us.  This visit of our
great Little General left me feeling very comfortable, as he was
fully an inch shorter than myself, and it seemed to me very wonderful
that that slight, courteous old man should be the hero of so many
exploits in India, Afghanistan, South Africa, and other parts of the
world.  It will be remembered of him forever that a few years before
he had given Great Britain a solemn warning of the intentions of
Germany.  With few exceptions the newspapers, the _London Times_
included, had branded him a scare-monger and jingo.  Alas, how
bitterly true was the great little man's prophecy!

He died a brief month afterwards, just as he would have wished, "in
harness," and among his Indian comrades he loved so well.

Then the rains descended, the floods came, and the plain became one
seething quagmire of mud.  Words are powerless to describe our
continual conflict with that mud; it was everywhere--in our eyes, our
hair, our tents, our clothes, our grub; we often had to swallow it as
well as wallow in it.  Again our poet-wit got his work in and this
was our universal lament:

  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  In mud we must wallow and mud we must swallow,
  Mud, mud, damnable mud,
  Oh say will we ever get out of the mud.


Our tents leaked incessantly, but with all our discomfort we were
healthy and happy and, in consequence, were grumbling all the time.
We roundly cursed our officers, anathematized the mud, swore we would
mutiny--all done sotto voce.  But we were very, very happy.

And now, to crown my happiness, I obtained leave to visit my people
in the Midlands, about one hundred and thirty miles from the place.
The only way I could curb my impatience was by cleaning and
re-cleaning my buttons, badges and boots, and vainly endeavoring to
read the newspaper.  At last, I paraded before the Colonel and
paymaster to receive my pass and money, and after satisfying the
critical eye of my commander that I was clean enough to be a credit
to the British Army, I was permitted to go.

I boarded a taxi and paid ten shillings for a three-mile ride to the
railway station.  Had the Shylock asked four times that amount I
would have cheerfully given it to him.

Only a son who loves his father and mother can appreciate such a home
coming as I got; I shall never forget it.  Mother-like, the dear old
lady was thoroughly dissatisfied because I hadn't the appetite of a
dozen strong men.  One of her remarks typified the English
mother--the peer of any woman on God's earth today.  I asked what she
thought of my journey over to do my bit for the Empire and her reply
was: "I knew you would come.  I knew it.  God bless you, my boy.  I
hate to think of where you are going, but I believe I would hate you
more, my own son as you are, if you did not go."

Such a reply from a woman who had already given one son for the cause
exemplifies the spirit of self-sacrifice which has so splendidly been
evidenced by the women of the Allies today.  These mothers deserve
the V.C. as truly as any soldier.

My father's greeting was typical of the reserved Englishman.  He
looked up at me without a word and just at that moment my young
sister walked in and stood beside him; the lassie was just as tall as
I was short; and my father's first remark was, "If you had been as
tall as this girl is, you might have called yourself a soldier."
Such was the greeting after an absence of six years and thus does the
Englishman cover up any signs of emotion.

The time was all too short to see everyone I wanted to see; my three
days' leave passed like an hour; but practically all the friends and
chums of my school days were either in France, on the sea, or in
training.  An athletic club to which I belonged before I left England
for Canada had a total membership of two hundred, and of this number
one hundred and eighty-eight were in khaki, and even at that early
date eight of them had paid the supreme price.

Promising to come back as soon as possible before I left for France I
said good-bye and commenced my return journey, feeling very homesick
and miserable.  But I found a very interesting companion on the way
back, one of the gallant boys of French's "Contemptibles."  He was
one of the few survivors of a battalion of Gloucesters and was one of
the twenty-four who held back about seventy times their number and
covered the retreat of the remnant of their regiment.  When history
is written and the deeds of the different regiments recorded, the
wonderful stand of the twenty-four will go down as an epoch of the
Great Retirement.

Reticent as most British soldiers are, yet being a comrade, he told
me enough to give me some idea of what we were going into.  Parting
from him at Bristol, by a strange coincidence I ran into a corporal
of the Second Battalion of Gloucesters.  This man had just completed
his service with the army and had been about a month on reserve when
again called out.  He now lies somewhere in France, for within three
weeks from this time his regiment was almost wiped out.

While sitting in the train I happened to put my head too far out of
the car window and away went my cap.  The corporal helped me out.  He
dug from his kit a cap of a wonderful checked pattern, big black and
white squares, and gave it to me.  It was staggering in its color
scheme, but better than nothing.  Next morning, judge of my
consternation when I found it impossible to get a cap from the
quartermaster in time to go on parade, and I was obliged, to go in my
beautiful new headpiece.  It seemed to shout its color scheme from
end to end of the battalion.  Particularly did Morgan make caustic
comment on the queer ideas of some people as to the proper head-dress
for a soldier, and everyone, from the corporal up wanted to know what
in hell I meant by coming on parade with that awful thing on my head.

Finally the Colonel came and ran his eye over his pets.  "Tshun," he
roared, and everyone "tshuned."  A moment of silence while the Old
Man critically lamped his battalion; then it broke.

"Who is that man who thinks he may come on parade in his own ideas of
fashion?  Fall out, that man, I want to speak to him."

I sneaked guiltily up to him, mentally noting those of my pals who
snickered loudest, and stood dutifully at attention.  After informing
me that in spite of my looks I was supposed to be a soldier, and that
although it was the dearest wish of his heart to permit me to
disgrace the battalion, yet he felt compelled to administer a little
correction.

"How came you to be wearing that monstrous thing?"

I explained truthfully, but he insisted that I had been imbibing and
had lost my cap as a consequence.  That afternoon, when tottering
under the weight of sides of beef and other heavy things, which I was
obliged to carry, I resolved that if I ever again lost my cap, I
would not be guilty of wearing an alibi.




CHAPTER VIII

LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CAMP

After my first trip home, for a few days I went about my work without
interest, but when one is in superb physical condition, it is
impossible to be depressed long, and soon I was grumbling away again
as happy as ever.  Still the wretched weather continued.  If it did
not rain, it snowed; if it did not do one or the other, it did both;
if it did not do both, a fog you could take in your hand would hang
over the place the whole day long.  If the Fates decreed we should
have a fine day, we were worked till our bones cried out for rest.

In the early morning we would curse the bugles as they blared out
their warning for us to be up and doing.  Sometimes the temptation
grew too strong and one of us would be missing when we fell in
shivering for our mornings physical torture.  This is the name the
Canadians had for physical drill.  The tardy one would regret his
indifference to "Reveille" before the day had well begun, for he
would usually be told off for all fatigues, as well as turning out
for the day's work with the battalion.

A vigorous trot would set our blood coursing through our veins, and
after the torture had loosened up our muscles, we wondered why we had
ever wanted to stay in bed at all.

Breakfast would follow, and after that we would fall in to be
inspected by the officers, tongue-lashed by the Colonel, and finally
marched off for instruction in tactics on the field, or other
necessary parts of an infantry soldier's training.  We might arrive
back in time to partake of a noon-day meal, or it would perhaps be in
the middle of the afternoon, or again we might stay out the whole
twenty-four hours.

Night alarms would see us sleepily but frantically struggling to don
our equipment so that we would make a record for our company by being
first at the assembling post.  The language on such occasions was
almost the acme of perfection, because our studies in the army in
that regard had brought us to a truly wonderful state of efficiency
in fluency and the ability to improvise suitable words for all
occasions.

One may therefore imagine the atmosphere when a buckle of Morgan's
equipment would fix itself firmly in some inaccessible part of mine
and we would struggle to straighten out the tangle by the dim light
of a candle.  Usually it would end by one of us inadvertently putting
out the candle.  After this there would be absolute silence as even
our vocabulary was not adequate to the situation.  With clenched
teeth we would relight the candle, if we were fortunate enough to
find it; if not, we finished our dressing by touch, each mentally
cursing the other for his clumsiness.

Finally we would stumble to the assembly post to receive a wigging
from the O.C. (officer commanding) of the company down.  On our way
back Morgan would tell me that in all his life he had never known one
so blankety-blank a clumsy as I was, and I would consign him to
everlasting perdition, and the quarrel would wax hotter and hotter,
to the great amusement of the other boys, until we arrived at the
inevitable stage when the challenge to fight is given.  Then the
sergeant would step in, and we would be obliged to satisfy ourselves
by mentally vowing to settle it once for all when we got back to
camp.  However, the excitement and fatigue would soon cool our
tempers, and the usual sequel was for the two of us to be found
foraging in some mutual enemy's camp, or we would settle down,
cuddled in one another's arms, for a long refreshing sleep.

At the remount camp, situated about two miles from our own camp, were
a number of unbroken horses; these were used as remounts for
artillery, cavalry, transports, etc.  Every day two or more companies
from the battalion were told off as "Remount fatigue" and had to
clean and groom the animals, and one day shortly after this, when it
was part of my duty to assist in taking a load of provisions for the
men who were looking after the horses, we came upon a wondrous
object, lying resplendent in all its native beauty, by the side of
the road.  Hardly believing our eyes, we bore down upon the stranger.
It was real, and we rejoiced.  Thirty-six gallons of good beer had
wandered away from a jolting wagon.  After several vain efforts, in
which we nearly ruptured ourselves with straining, we finally
succeeded in hoisting it on our transport.  It was necessary to
resort to "camouflage" to hide our treasure, but it was done.  The
day passed slowly, as we curried and brushed that kicking, squealing
mass.  We were tortured with fear lest any of the others should
discover our find.  As expert thieves we respected others of the
craft, and in this case we feared them.

Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.
By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.
Night came, and to our relief, our cask had not been unearthed.  That
night figures might have been discerned in the gloom, stealthily
making their way to a certain big marquee.  Inside this marquee was
stacked bales of hay and other feed for the transport animals.

By the dim light of two stable lanterns we paid our respects to the
delightful stranger until we had exhausted its hospitality, and at
"Lights out" we tacked homewards, after an affectionate farewell to
one another.